ray-haystack integration (#278)
deepset-ai/haystack-integrations: integrations/ray.md

---
layout: integration
name: Ray
description: Run and scale Haystack Pipelines with Ray in distributed manner
authors:
  - name: Sergey Bondarenco
    socials:
      github: prosto
pypi: https://pypi.org/project/ray-haystack/
repo: https://github.com/prosto/ray-haystack

> type: Orchestration Framework

Reviewer: What would you think about this option? 
```suggestion
type: Distributed Computing
```

report_issue: https://github.com/prosto/ray-haystack/issues
logo: /logos/ray.png
version: Haystack 2.0
toc: true
---

### Table of Contents

- [Overview](#overview)
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Usage](#usage)
  - [Start with an example](#start-with-an-example)
  - [Read pipeline events](#read-pipeline-events)
  - [Component Serialization](#component-serialization)
  - [DocumentStore with Ray](#documentstore-with-ray)
  - [RayPipeline Settings](#raypipeline-settings)
  - [Middleware](#middleware)
- [Resources](#resources)
- [License](#license)

## Overview

`ray-haystack` is a python package which allows running [Haystack pipelines](https://docs.haystack.deepset.ai/docs/pipelines) on [Ray](https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/ray-overview/index.html)

> in distributed manner. The package provides same API to build and run Haystack pipelines but under the hood components are being distributed to remote nodes for execution using Ray primitives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in a distributed manner. The package provides the same API to build and run Haystack pipelines, but under the hood, components are being distributed to remote nodes for execution using Ray primitives.
```

> Specifically [Ray Actor](https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/ray-core/actors.html) is created for each component in a pipeline to `run` its logic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Specifically, [Ray Actor](https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/ray-core/actors.html) is created for each component in a pipeline to `run` its logic.
```

The purpose of this library is to showcase the ability to run Haystack in a distributed setup with Ray featuring its options to configure the payload, e.g:

- Control with [resources](https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/ray-core/scheduling/resources.html) how much CPU/GPU is needed for a component to run (per each component if needed)
- Manage [environment dependencies](https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/ray-core/handling-dependencies.html) for components to run on dedicated machines.
- Run pipeline on Kubernetes using [KubeRay](https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/cluster/kubernetes/getting-started.html)

> Most of the times you will run Haystack pipelines on your local environment, even in production you will want to run pipeline on a single node in case the goal is to quickly return response to the user without overhead you would usually get with distributed setup. However in case of long running and complex RAG pipelines distributed way might help:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of the time, you will run Haystack pipelines on your local environment; even in production, you will want to run the pipeline on a single node if the goal is to return a response quickly to the user without the overhead you would usually get with a distributed setup. However, in the case of long-running and complex RAG pipelines distributed way might help:
```

- Not every component needs GPU, most will use some external API calls. With Ray it should be possible to assign respective resource requirements (CPU, RAM) per component execution needs.

> - Some components might take longer to run, so ideally if there should be an option to parallelize component execution it should decrease pipeline run time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Some components might take longer to run, so ideally, if there should be an option to parallelize component execution, it should decrease pipeline run time.
```

> - With asynchronous execution it should be possible to interact with different component execution stages (e.g. fire an event before and after component starts).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- With asynchronous execution, it should be possible to interact with different component execution stages (e.g., fire an event before and after the component starts).
```

> `ray-haystack` provides a custom implementation for pipeline execution logic with the goal to stay **as complaint as possible with native Haystack implementation**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ray-haystack` provides a custom implementation for pipeline execution logic with the goal to stay **as compliant as possible with native Haystack implementation**.
```

> You should expect in most cases same results (outputs) from pipeline runs. On top of that the package will parallelize component runs where possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In most cases, you should expect the same results (outputs) from pipeline runs. On top of that, the package will parallelize component runs where possible.
```

Components with no active dependencies can be scheduled without waiting for currently running components.

![Ray Pipeline Parallel](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/deepset-ai/haystack-integrations/main/images/ray-pipeline-concurrent.gif)

## Installation

`ray-haystack` can be installed as any other Python library, using pip:

```shell
pip install ray-haystack
```

> The package should work with python version 3.8 and onwards. If you plan to use `ray-haystack` with an existing Ray cluster make sure you align python and `ray` versions with those running in the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The package should work with python version 3.8 and onwards. If you plan to use `ray-haystack` with an existing Ray cluster, make sure you align python and `ray` versions with those running in the cluster.
```

> **Note**
> The `ray-haystack` package will install both `haystack-ai` and `ray` as transitive dependencies. The minimum supported version of haystack is `2.6.0`.

> If you would like to see [Ray dashboard](https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/ray-observability/getting-started.html) when starting Ray cluster locally install Ray as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you would like to see [Ray dashboard](https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/ray-observability/getting-started.html) when starting Ray cluster locally, install Ray as follows:
```

```shell
pip install -U "ray[default]"
pip install ray-haystack
```

> While pipeline is running locally access the dashboard in browser at [http://localhost:8265](http://localhost:8265).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the pipeline is running locally, access the dashboard in the browser at [http://localhost:8265](http://localhost:8265).
```

## Usage

### Start with an example

> Once `ray-haystack` is installed lets demonstrate how it works by running a simple example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once `ray-haystack` is installed, let's demonstrate how it works by running a simple example.
```

> We will build a pipeline that fetches RSS news headlines from the list of given urls, converts each headline to a `Document` with content equal to the title of the headline. We then asks LLM (`OpenAIGenerator`) to create news summary from the list of converted Documents and given prompt `template`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will build a pipeline that fetches RSS news headlines from the list of given URLs and converts each headline to a `Document` with content equal to the headline title. We then ask LLM (`OpenAIGenerator`) to create a news summary from the list of converted Documents, given a prompt `template`.
```

            "https://www.business-standard.com/rss/home_page_top_stories.rss",
            "https://feeds.a.dj.com/rss/WSJcomUSBusiness.xml",
        ]
    },
    "politics-news-fetcher": {
        "urls": [
            "https://search.cnbc.com/rs/search/combinedcms/view.xml?partnerId=wrss01&id=10000113",
            "https://rss.nytimes.com/services/xml/rss/nyt/Politics.xml",
        ]
    },
}

# Run pipeline with inputs
result = pipeline.run(pipeline_inputs)

# Print response from LLM
print("RESULT: ", result["generator"]["replies"][0])
```

Key takeways from the example:

- import `ray` module
- import `RayPipeline` (from `ray_haystack`) instead of `Pipeline` class from `haystack`
- before running the pipeline [local ray cluster](https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/ray-core/starting-ray.html#start-ray-init) is started with explicit `ray.init()` call

Under the hood `RyaPipeline` creates actors for each component in the pipeline and runs it in distributed manner until no components left to run. By default `RyaPipeline` blocks until pipeline finishes its execution.

### Read pipeline events

> In some cases you would want to asynchronously react to particular pipeline execution points:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In some cases, you would want to react asynchronously to particular pipeline execution points:
```

- when pipeline starts
- before component runs
- after component finishes
- after pipeline finishes

> Internally `RayPipeline` creates an instance of [Ray Queue](https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/ray-core/api/doc/ray.util.queue.Queue.html) where such events are being stored and can be consumed from.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Internally, `RayPipeline` creates an instance of [Ray Queue](https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/ray-core/api/doc/ray.util.queue.Queue.html) where such events are stored and can be consumed.
```

Except standard `run` method `RayPipeline` provides a method called `run_nowait` which returns pipeline execution result without blocking current logic. We can use `run_nowait` to iterate over pipeline events, e.g.

```python
result = pipeline.run_nowait(pipeline_inputs)

for pipeline_event in result.pipeline_events_sync():
    print(
        f"\n>>> [{pipeline_event.time}] Source: {pipeline_event.source} | Type: {pipeline_event.type} | Data={pipeline_event.data}"
    )
```

### Component Serialization

> If you run native Haystack pipeline locally component remain in the same python process and there is no reason to care about distributed setup. When RayPipeline runs in distributed manner it should be able to [serialize](https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/ray-core/objects/serialization.html) components before they end up in remote task or actor.
> 
> `ray-haystack` package relies on Haystack's standard `to_dict` and `from_dict` methods to serialize and deserialize components respectively.
> Please refer to main [documentation](https://github.com/prosto/ray-haystack?tab=readme-ov-file#component-serialization) to see a detailed explanation and features which handle edge cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you run the native Haystack pipeline locally, the components remain in the same Python process, and there is no reason to care about the distributed setup. When `RayPipeline` runs in a distributed manner, it should be able to [serialize](https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/ray-core/objects/serialization.html) components before they end up in a remote task or actor.

The `ray-haystack` package relies on Haystack's standard `to_dict` and `from_dict` methods to serialize and deserialize components, respectively.
Please refer to the main [documentation](https://github.com/prosto/ray-haystack?tab=readme-ov-file#component-serialization) for a detailed explanation and features that handle edge cases.
```

### DocumentStore with Ray

> When you use [InMemoryDocumentStore](https://docs.haystack.deepset.ai/docs/inmemorydocumentstore) or any DocumentStore which runs in-memory with `RayPipeline` you will stumble upon an apparent issue: in distributed environment such DocumentStore will fail to operate as components which reference the store will not point to single instance but rather a copy of it.
> 
> `ray-haystack` package provides a wrapper around `InMemoryDocumentStore` by implementing a proxy pattern so that only a single instance of `InMemoryDocumentStore` across Ray cluster is present. With that pipeline components could share a single store. Use `RayInMemoryDocumentStore`, `RayInMemoryEmbeddingRetriever` or `RayInMemoryBM25Retriever` in case you need in-memory document store in your Ray pipelines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you use [InMemoryDocumentStore](https://docs.haystack.deepset.ai/docs/inmemorydocumentstore) or any DocumentStore that runs in memory with `RayPipeline`, you will stumble upon an apparent issue: in a distributed environment, these document stores running in memory will fail to operate as components that reference the store will not point to a single instance but rather a copy of it.

`ray-haystack` package provides a wrapper around `InMemoryDocumentStore` by implementing a proxy pattern so that only a single instance of `InMemoryDocumentStore` across Ray cluster is present. With that, components can share a single store. Use `RayInMemoryDocumentStore`, `RayInMemoryEmbeddingRetriever` or `RayInMemoryBM25Retriever` in case you need in-memory document store in your Ray pipelines.
```

### RayPipeline Settings

> When an actor is created in Ray we can control its behavior by providing certain [settings](https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/ray-core/api/doc/ray.actor.ActorClass.options.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When an actor is created in Ray, we can control its behavior by providing certain [settings](https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/ray-core/api/doc/ray.actor.ActorClass.options.html).
```
